Add initial FOCIL spec (#609)
ethereum/execution-apis: src/engine/bogota.md

#### Request

* method: `engine_newPayloadV6`
* params:
  1. `executionPayload`: [`ExecutionPayloadV4`](./amsterdam.md#executionpayloadv4).
  2. `expectedBlobVersionedHashes`: `Array of DATA`, 32 Bytes - Array of expected blob versioned hashes to validate.
  3. `parentBeaconBlockRoot`: `DATA`, 32 Bytes - Root of the parent beacon block.
  4. `executionRequests`: `Array of DATA` - List of execution layer triggered requests. Each list element is a `requests` byte array as defined by [EIP-7685](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7685). The first byte of each element is the `request_type` and the remaining bytes are the `request_data`. Elements of the list **MUST** be ordered by `request_type` in ascending order. Elements with empty `request_data` **MUST** be excluded from the list.
  5. `inclusionListTransactions`: `Array of DATA` - Array of transaction objects, each object is a byte list (`DATA`) representing `TransactionType || TransactionPayload` or `LegacyTransaction` as defined in [EIP-2718](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2718).

#### Response

* result: [`PayloadStatusV1`](./paris.md#payloadstatusv1), values of the `status` field are modified in the following way:

>   - `INVALID_BLOCK_HASH` status value is supplanted by `INVALID`.

Reviewer: Not sure if we need this, cause it has already been introduced in Shanghai

  - `INCLUSION_LIST_UNSATISFIED` status value is appended.
* error: code and message set in case an exception happens while processing the payload.

#### Specification

This method follows the same specification as [`engine_newPayloadV5`](./amsterdam.md#engine_newpayloadv5) with the following changes:

1. Client software **MUST** return `-38005: Unsupported fork` error if the `timestamp` of the payload does not fall within the time frame of the Bogota fork.

2. Client software **MUST** return `{status: INCLUSION_LIST_UNSATISFIED, latestValidHash: null, validationError: null}` if `executionPayload` fails to satisfy the inclusion list constraints with respect to `inclusionListTransactions` as defined in [EIP-7805](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7805).

### engine_getInclusionListV1

#### Request

* method: `engine_getInclusionListV1`
* params:

>   1. `parentHash`: `DATA`, 32 Bytes - block hash of the parent block upon which the inclusion list should be built.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1. `blockHash`: `DATA`, 32 Bytes - block hash of the block upon which the inclusion list should be built.
```
why call it `parentHash`?

* timeout: 1s

#### Response

* result: `Array of DATA` - Array of transaction objects, each object is a byte list (`DATA`) representing `TransactionType || TransactionPayload` or `LegacyTransaction` as defined in [EIP-2718](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2718).
* error: code and message set in case an exception happens while getting the inclusion list.

#### Specification

> 1. Client software **MUST** return `-38007: Unknown parent` error if a block with the given `parentHash` does not exist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Client software **MUST** return `-38001: Unknown payload` error if a block with the given `blockHash` does not exist.
```
apply if the suggestion above makes sense

Author: Awesome, it makes more sense and does simplify the spec. Thanks!

  5. `inclusionListTransactions`: `Array of DATA` - Array of transaction objects, each object is a byte list (`DATA`) representing `TransactionType || TransactionPayload` or `LegacyTransaction` as defined in [EIP-2718](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2718).

#### Response

* result: [`PayloadStatusV1`](./paris.md#payloadstatusv1), values of the `status` field are modified in the following way:
  - `INCLUSION_LIST_UNSATISFIED` status value is appended.
* error: code and message set in case an exception happens while processing the payload.

#### Specification

This method follows the same specification as [`engine_newPayloadV5`](./amsterdam.md#engine_newpayloadv5) with the following changes:

1. Client software **MUST** return `-38005: Unsupported fork` error if the `timestamp` of the payload does not fall within the time frame of the Bogota fork.

> 2. Client software **MUST** return `{status: INCLUSION_LIST_UNSATISFIED, latestValidHash: null, validationError: null}` if `executionPayload` fails to satisfy the inclusion list constraints with respect to `inclusionListTransactions` as defined in [EIP-7805](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7805).

Reviewer: I think we should be explicit about payload validity in this case. `INCLUSION_LIST_UNSATISFIED` is returned only if the payload is `VALID`

  - [Update the methods of previous forks](#update-the-methods-of-previous-forks)
    - [Amsterdam API](#amsterdam-api)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Constants

| Name | Value |
| - | - |
| `MAX_BYTES_PER_INCLUSION_LIST` |  `uint64(8192) = 2**13` |

## Structures

### PayloadAttributesV5

This structure has the syntax of [`PayloadAttributesV4`](./amsterdam.md#payloadattributesv4) and appends a single field: `inclusionListTransactions`.

- `timestamp`: `QUANTITY`, 64 Bits - value for the `timestamp` field of the new payload
- `prevRandao`: `DATA`, 32 Bytes - value for the `prevRandao` field of the new payload
- `suggestedFeeRecipient`: `DATA`, 20 Bytes - suggested value for the `feeRecipient` field of the new payload
- `withdrawals`: `Array of WithdrawalV1` - Array of withdrawals, each object is an `OBJECT` containing the fields of a `WithdrawalV1` structure.
- `parentBeaconBlockRoot`: `DATA`, 32 Bytes - Root of the parent beacon block.
- `slotNumber`: `QUANTITY`, 64 Bits - value for the `slotNumber` field of the new payload
- `targetGasLimit`: `QUANTITY`, 64 Bits - target value for the `gasLimit` field of the new payload

> - `inclusionListTransactions`: `Array of DATA` - Array of transaction objects, each object is a byte list (`DATA`) representing `TransactionType || TransactionPayload` or `LegacyTransaction` as defined in [EIP-2718](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2718).

Reviewer 2: If the block gets replayed (its an old block) then the IL is (as far as I understand) not available.
Would this be represented as empty array? Or maybe `null` is better here?

Author: Yes, it will be an empty array. ILs are ephemeral objects; it's only used during attestation.

Reviewer 2: So this means that if the IL is an empty array at attestation, it is the same object when we replay transactions (IL is not available (meaning IL is technically empty)).
I feel it is more "clear"/correct to push `null` in that case. The CL states to the EL that the IL (these abbrevations, lol :stuck_out_tongue_winking_eye: ) is not available (`null`)  which is different from "it is available and there are no transactions in it" (empty list, `[]`)). This distinguishes the two situations from each other. 
I believe it is more correct and also more forward compatible.

Author: Why would the EL need to distinguish those two cases? Not sure why passing null is more forward compatible either.

Author: I've got to think about this from time to time and I'm still on the fence. Passing `null` for replay makes it distinguishable from newPayload call. In other words, I feel like passing `null` for reply is the right choice in terms of correctness. But given that engine APIs is trusted, not sure how much this matters. Will keep this in mind and let people to chime in later.

### PayloadStatusV2

This structure has the syntax of `PayloadStatusV1` and appends a single field: `inclusionListSatisfied`

- `status`: `enum` - `"VALID" | "INVALID" | "SYNCING" | "ACCEPTED"`
- `latestValidHash`: `DATA|null`, 32 Bytes - the hash of the most recent *valid* block in the branch defined by payload and its ancestors
- `validationError`: `String|null` - a message providing additional details on the validation error if the payload is classified as `INVALID`.

> - `inclusionListSatisfied`: `BOOLEAN|null` - whether the payload satisfied the inclusion list constraints if it is deemed `VALID`; `null` otherwise.

Reviewer 2: This is not consistent with the EIP, which says `INCLUSION_LIST_UNSATISFIED` must be returned if the IL is not satisfied. 
So it should be added to status field, and this `inclusionListSatisfied` param removed (or update the EIP)

Author: The specs are source of truth and I'm aware that the EIP is outdated. I've put it in the back burner because the specs have been changing (in details). I should update the EIP (soonTM 😅).

    2. Otherwise, `inclusionListSatisfied` **MUST** be `null`.

3. Client software **MUST** retain `inclusionListTransactions` for a payload with `ACCEPTED` status. Client software **MAY** discard them once the payload is no longer the tip of a branch.

### engine_getInclusionListV1

#### Request

* method: `engine_getInclusionListV1`
* params: []
* timeout: 1s

#### Response

* result: `Array of DATA` - Array of transaction objects, each object is a byte list (`DATA`) representing `TransactionType || TransactionPayload` or `LegacyTransaction` as defined in [EIP-2718](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2718).
* error: code and message set in case an exception happens while getting the inclusion list.

#### Specification

1. Client software **MUST** provide a list of transactions for the inclusion list based on the local view of the mempool. The strategy for selecting which transactions to include is implementation dependent.

2. Client software **MUST** ensure the byte length of the RLP encoding of the returned transaction list does not exceed `MAX_BYTES_PER_INCLUSION_LIST`.

> 3. Client software **MUST NOT** include any [blob transaction](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4844#blob-transaction) in the returned transaction list.

Reviewer 2: The ban on blob transactions is not in the EIP, and this should be stated there.

Author: See the comment above.

## Methods

### engine_newPayloadV6

Method parameter list is extended with `inclusionListTransactions`.

#### Request

* method: `engine_newPayloadV6`
* params:
  1. `executionPayload`: [`ExecutionPayloadV4`](./amsterdam.md#executionpayloadv4).
  2. `expectedBlobVersionedHashes`: `Array of DATA`, 32 Bytes - Array of expected blob versioned hashes to validate.
  3. `parentBeaconBlockRoot`: `DATA`, 32 Bytes - Root of the parent beacon block.
  4. `executionRequests`: `Array of DATA` - List of execution layer triggered requests. Each list element is a `requests` byte array as defined by [EIP-7685](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7685). The first byte of each element is the `request_type` and the remaining bytes are the `request_data`. Elements of the list **MUST** be ordered by `request_type` in ascending order. Elements with empty `request_data` **MUST** be excluded from the list.
  5. `inclusionListTransactions`: `Array of DATA` - Array of transaction objects, each object is a byte list (`DATA`) representing `TransactionType || TransactionPayload` or `LegacyTransaction` as defined in [EIP-2718](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2718).

> 

Reviewer: This function definition misses `timeout` constraint

Author: Good catch. Do you want me to add the `timeout` constraint to engine_newPayloadV3-V5?

Reviewer: yes, makes sense to add timeout to all of them

Author: Added the timeout constraint to previous newPayload versions in a [separate PR](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-apis/pull/849).

#### Response

* result: [`PayloadStatusV2`](#payloadstatusv2)
* error: code and message set in case an exception happens while processing the payload.

#### Specification

This method follows the same specification as [`engine_newPayloadV5`](./amsterdam.md#engine_newpayloadv5) with the following changes:

1. Client software **MUST** return `-38005: Unsupported fork` error if the `timestamp` of the payload does not fall within the time frame of the Bogota fork.

2. Client software **MUST** set `inclusionListSatisfied` in the following way:

    1. If the payload is deemed `VALID`, `inclusionListSatisfied` **MUST** be set to whether the payload satisfied the inclusion list constraints.

    2. Otherwise, `inclusionListSatisfied` **MUST** be `null`.

> 3. Client software **MUST** retain `inclusionListTransactions` for a payload with `ACCEPTED` status. Client software **MAY** discard them once the payload is no longer the tip of a branch. Client software **MUST** use the retained `inclusionListTransactions` if it later checks whether the payload satisfies the inclusion list constraints.

Reviewer: > Client software **MUST** use the retained `inclusionListTransactions` if it later checks whether the payload satisfies the inclusion list constraints.

What do you think about moving this statement to the `fcU` as `fcU` handling will be the place where previously cached IL is gonna be used?

Author: Would it be moved to the 2.2 bullet, extending point (9)? Something like this but with some modification:

```
2. Extend point (9) of the `engine_forkchoiceUpdatedV1` [specification](./paris.md#specification-1) by defining `payloadStatus.inclusionListSatisfied`:

    1. If the payload referenced by `forkchoiceState.headBlockHash` is deemed `VALID`, `payloadStatus.inclusionListSatisfied` **MUST** be set to whether the payload satisfied the inclusion list constraints.

    2. Client software **MUST** use the retained `inclusionListTransactions` if it later checks whether the payload satisfies the inclusion list constraints.
```

Reviewer: yes, what do you think about something like the following:
> **MUST** use the retained `inclusionListTransactions` if it runs payload validation and inclusion list constraints check while processing this call.

Author: How about this?

```
2. Extend point (9) of the `engine_forkchoiceUpdatedV1` [specification](./paris.md#specification-1) by defining `payloadStatus.inclusionListSatisfied`:

    1. If the payload referenced by `forkchoiceState.headBlockHash` is deemed `VALID`, `payloadStatus.inclusionListSatisfied` **MUST** be set to whether the payload satisfied the inclusion list constraints.

    2. Client software **MUST** use the retained `inclusionListTransactions` if it validates the payload and checks whether the payload satisfies the inclusion list constraints while processing the call.

    3. Otherwise, `payloadStatus.inclusionListSatisfied` **MUST** be `null`.
```

Reviewer: Looks good to me!

### engine_getInclusionListV1

#### Request

* method: `engine_getInclusionListV1`
* params:

>   1. `blockHash`: `DATA`, 32 Bytes - block hash of the block upon which the inclusion list should be built.

Reviewer: Will the `blockHash` parameter have any value other than the head of the chain? If yes, will EL be capable of handling an arbitrary `blockHash` when processing this call?

Author: It's supposed to be the head. Maybe it's safe to remove this because FCU will be either called by 6s or not called? (In other words, the EL will have the head view by the time `getInclusionList` is called.)

Reviewer: I just think that restricting the `blockHash` would be valuable as if a CL requests an IL based on the block that is an epoch older than the head it might be quite hard for EL to process this request. If we could restrict it to the most recent head of the chain then I think EL will just construct IL based on the mempool without any additional computations

Author: There is no reason for the CL to request an IL based off previous block. Can the CL and the EL have different head block view post-Glamsterdam? If not, we could just remove this field.

Reviewer: > Can the CL and the EL have different head block view post-Glamsterdam?

Good question. I think worth to ask CL developers about this as it might be implementation dependent. Another question to answer: suppose `blockHash` is an ancestor of the head, what EL should do in order to process IL request properly? Should it consider transactions that are included in the head block as candidates for IL, what if those transactions were not from public mempool?

Author: I will ask CL devs about the head view. Regarding `blockHash` of the parent, I think the EL should include transactions in the head block. But this will be up to implementor's discretion as part of the IL building strategies.

Author: After discussing on `blockHash` parameter, @mkalinin and I came to a conclusion that removing the parameter and letting the EL to return an IL built based on their head view and mempool would be the best way forward.

The desiderata of `getInclusionList` is providing the most fresh IL. The `blockHash` parameter was introduced to tell the EL which payload should the IL be built on to meet the goal. However, @mkalinin raised a point that to what extend `blockHash` is allowed and how easy it is to implement when `blockHash` points to a non-head payload such as the parent or the head of a different branch.

When the CL calls `getInclusionList`, there are two possible cases:

i) If there is no pending FCU, the `blockHash` will match the head.
ii) If there is some pending FCU—such as when newPayload is still being processed—the CL would pass the parent of the head or a payload on a different branch.

Another factor to consider is gas limit increase. With [Hegota repricings](https://ethresear.ch/t/scaling-in-hegota-using-the-eth-transfer-to-anchor-execution-and-bandwidth/25232), all blocks will have the execution throughput of 100M gas per second at the worst case. Note that the payload reveal deadline is 6s into the slot. The IL broadcast deadline, which is still tentative, will be set somewhere between 6s and 12s. There is some limit up to which the IL broadcast deadline can be pushed because builders need to have enough time to build/update their payloads with IL transactions. Assuming the IL broadcast deadline is 8s, case ii) won't happen until the max gas limit reaches 100M-200M, depending on when the CL calls `getInclusionList`. However, as we aim to increase the gas limit beyond 200M, I think the design should consider that case ii) will eventually happen. 

Until the max gas limit hits 100M-200M, the `blockHash` doesn't deliver any meaningful information. After that, it could help produce fresher IL but the cost is complexity. If it points to the parent, which is already the EL's head, it's equivalent to no `blockHash` parameter. If it matches the payload being processed, the spec should specify this and there is a risk that the payload might be reorged. If it refers to a block on a different branch, it may or may not be trivial to implement. It would be similar to a reorg simulation, but this reorg will be shorter than 2 epochs though. (This is because ILs are enforced only when the latest finalized checkpoint is not older than 1 epoch.)

Additionally, these nodes that will later receive an FCU that points to a different branch is minority by definition. In other words, if we remove the `blockHash` parameter, these nodes will produce ILs from a non-canonical branch, which will be less effective, but these will be the minority of the total 16 ILs. To sum up, the `blockHash` parameter could improve IL freshness, but the trade-off here is between the added implementation complexity and how much benefit it would actually deliver.

We would propose to go without `blockHash` parameter for simplicity. The EL will produce an IL based on their local mempool view, and for case ii), the EL could use some heuristic for transactions in the payload being processed. It will be part of IL building strategy.

We would like to invite EL devs to weigh in on this issue in the future, once more people participate Hegota development.

  4. `executionRequests`: `Array of DATA` - List of execution layer triggered requests. Each list element is a `requests` byte array as defined by [EIP-7685](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7685). The first byte of each element is the `request_type` and the remaining bytes are the `request_data`. Elements of the list **MUST** be ordered by `request_type` in ascending order. Elements with empty `request_data` **MUST** be excluded from the list.
  5. `inclusionListTransactions`: `Array of DATA` - Array of transaction objects, each object is a byte list (`DATA`) representing `TransactionType || TransactionPayload` or `LegacyTransaction` as defined in [EIP-2718](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2718).

#### Response

* result: [`PayloadStatusV2`](#payloadstatusv2)
* error: code and message set in case an exception happens while processing the payload.

#### Specification

This method follows the same specification as [`engine_newPayloadV5`](./amsterdam.md#engine_newpayloadv5) with the following changes:

1. Client software **MUST** return `-38005: Unsupported fork` error if the `timestamp` of the payload does not fall within the time frame of the Bogota fork.

> 2. Client software **MUST** store `inclusionListTransactions` for a payload with `ACCEPTED` status. Client software **MUST** use the stored `inclusionListTransactions` when the payload is later validated.

Author: I think it's okay for the EL to store `inclusionListTransactions` only for the latest ACCEPTED payload per branch. I'd like to ask whether this understanding is correct and whether this should be specified. cc @mkalinin
